hacktivator-program (#196)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/04-resources/04-tutorials/rootstock-vyper.md

---

> sidebar_label: Vyper Smart Contract on RootStock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: Vyper Smart Contract on Rootstock
```

sidebar_position: 7

> title: Deploying a Vyper Smart Contract to RootStock (RSK) Testnet using Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Deploying a Vyper Smart Contract to Rootstock Testnet using Python
```

> description: "This guide walks through the process of deploying a smart contract to the RootStock (RSK) testnet using Python and Web3.py. We'll be deploying a simple Vyper contract that demonstrates how to interact with the RSK network."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "This guide walks through the process of deploying a smart contract to the Rootstock testnet using Python and Web3.py. We'll be deploying a simple Vyper contract that demonstrates how to interact with the Rootstock network."
```

tags: 
  - rsk
  - rootstock
  - tutorials
  - resources
  - tests
  - web3py
  - vyper
  - smart contracts
  - python
  - developers
---

> This guide demonstrates how to deploy smart contracts written in Vyper to the RootStock (RSK) testnet using Python and Web3.py. RSK is a groundbreaking smart contract platform that's merge-mined with Bitcoin, offering unique advantages for developers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide demonstrates how to deploy smart contracts written in Vyper to the Rootstock testnet using Python and Web3.py. Rootstock is a layer 2 solution that combines the security of Bitcoin's proof of work with Ethereum's smart contract capabilities. The platform is open-source, EVM-compatible, and secured by over 60% of Bitcoin’s hashing power, offering unique advantages for developers:
```

- **Bitcoin Compatibility**: Deploy smart contracts while leveraging Bitcoin's security and network effects
- **EVM Compatibility**: Use familiar Ethereum tools and practices while building on Bitcoin

> - **Lower Fees**: Benefit from RSK's cost-effective transaction fees

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Lower Fees**: Benefit from low transaction fees on Rootstock
```

> - **Scalability**: Enjoy higher transaction throughput compared to the Bitcoin mainnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Scalability**: Handle a higher volume of transactions without congestion
```

> We'll walk through creating a simple Vyper contract and deploying it to RSK's testnet, covering everything from environment setup to handling RSK-specific configurations. Whether you're an experienced Ethereum developer looking to expand to Bitcoin-based smart contracts, or just starting your blockchain journey, this guide will help you get up and running with RSK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll walk through creating a simple Vyper contract and deploying it to the Rootstock testnet, covering everything from environment setup to handling Rootstock-specific network configurations. 

Whether you're an experienced Ethereum developer looking to expand to Bitcoin-based smart contracts, or just starting your blockchain journey, this guide will help you get up and running with Vyper Contracts on Rootstock.
```

## Prerequisites

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)

>   - You'll know you've done it right if you can run `uv --version` and see a version number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - To confirm installation, run `uv --version`, it should return a version number.
```

- [git](https://git-scm.com/)

>   - You'll know you've done it right if you can run `git --version` and see a version number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - To confirm installation, run `git --version`, it should return a version number.
```

  - Helpful shortcut:

```bash
# For bash
echo "source $HOME/.bashrc >> $HOME/.bash_profile"

# For zsh
echo "source $HOME/.zshenv >> $HOME/.zprofile"
```

> - Python 3.x

Reviewer: Should I install Python 3? its not clear

Author: Yes, for this tutorial we will install python3.11

Reviewer: Great. Thank you, kindly include this with the command to install or a link.

Using the pkg: https://www.python.org/downloads/

Alos add that user should install the certificate

Check the python version: `which -a python`

If there is a way to do this via homebrew for Mac, and others for Windows, also specify: https://www.python.org/downloads/

<img width="612" alt="Screenshot 2024-12-09 at 13 36 28" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/416b6111-ae61-4d25-8cc1-90930469d295">

- A text editor
- Basic understanding of smart contracts and Python

> - RSK testnet RBTC (will show you how to get this)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Rootstock testnet RBTC](https://faucet.rootstock.io/)
```

## Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/EdwinLiavaa/Web3py-Vyper-RootStock.git
cd Web3py-Vyper-RootStock
```

> ### uv

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Syncing uv
```

Reviewer: Include a descriptive title here

> ```bash

Reviewer: Please add a one line sentence of what this does

Author: uv sync is a fast package management command that downloads and installs your project's Python dependencies while creating a lockfile for reproducible installations.

uv sync
```

> ### pip/python

Reviewer: Same with here. Add a descriptive title and also why the reader should run the following commands in a short sentence

Author: The pip/python section creates a virtual environment (python -m venv ./venv), activates it (source ./venv/bin/activate), and installs the project dependencies from requirements.txt (pip install -r requirements.txt).

```bash

> python -m venv ./venv

Reviewer: This throws an error:

`python -m venv ./venv`

owanate@Owanates-MacBook-Pro Web3py-Vyper-RootStock % python -m venv ./venv
zsh: command not found: python

This probably happened because of my comment above.

Author: It looks like Python's venv module is not installed on your system. You are using a MacBook, so You can try fix this by:

Reinstalling Python and make sure to check the option to install pip and venv during installation
Additionally, you should ensure you have Python 3 installed and are using the correct Python command (sometimes it needs to be python3 instead of python).

Reviewer: Ok. Cool

This works for me: `python3 -m venv ./venv`

source ./venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

> ## Quickstart

Reviewer: We're creating a hello.py file here right? Instead of quickstart, add a descriptive header title

Author: We run the hello.py Python script as a quick test to verify that our project environment (either with UV or with pip/python virtual environment) is setup properly.

```bash
uv run hello.py # for UV
# or
python hello.py # for pip/python

> ```

Reviewer: Explain in what cases uv or pip should be used and what the command returns

Reviewer: I get this when I run the second command:

(venv) owanate@Owanates-MacBook-Pro Web3py-Vyper-RootStock % python3 hello.py
Hello from web3py-Vyper-RootStock!

Author: Both uv run hello.py and python hello.py will run the script and output "Hello from web3py-Vyper-RootStock!", with UV being preferred for faster, modern projects and pip for traditional Python setups.

## Setup Environment

> First, let's set up our Python environment and install the necessary packages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set up our Python environment and install the necessary packages, we will do the following:
```

```bash
# Create and activate virtual environment
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install required packages
pip install python-dotenv web3 vyper
```

## Configuration

> Create a `.env` file in your project root with your configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `.env` file in the project root and specify your custom configuration:
```

```env

> RPC_URL="https://rpc.testnet.rootstock.io/[YOUR-API-KEY]"

Reviewer: Add a note to replace API key with testnet api key

Also link to guide on how to setup and account and create a testnet API key using the RPC API

https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/rpc-api/rootstock/setup/

PRIVATE_KEY="your-private-key"  # Never commit your real private key!
MY_ADDRESS="your-wallet-address"
```

> THIS IS ONLY FOR TESTING - TYPICALLY YOU SHOULD NEVER SHARE YOUR PRIVATE KEY.

Reviewer: https://dev.rootstock.io/components/#admonitions

## Get Testnet RBTC

Before deploying, you'll need some testnet RBTC:

> 1. Go to the RSK faucet: https://faucet.rsk.co/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Go to the Rootstock faucet: https://faucet.rootstock.io/
```

2. Enter your wallet address
3. Complete the captcha and request funds
4. Wait a few minutes for the transaction to be confirmed

## The Smart Contract

> Here's our simple Vyper contract (`favorites.vy`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a simple Vyper contract (`favorites.vy`):
```

Reviewer: This can be found in the project files

```python
# @version ^0.3.7

favorite_number: public(uint256)
owner: public(address)

@external
def __init__():
    self.owner = msg.sender
    self.favorite_number = 0

@external
def store(new_number: uint256):
    self.favorite_number = new_number
```

## Deployment Script

> Here's our Python script to deploy the contract (`deploy_favorites_unsafe.py`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a Python script to deploy the contract (`deploy_favorites_unsafe.py`):
```

        print("4. Wait a few minutes for the transaction to be confirmed")
        return

    # Create the contract in Python
    favorites_contract = w3.eth.contract(
        abi=compliation_details["abi"], bytecode=compliation_details["bytecode"]
    )

    # Submit the transaction that deploys the contract
    nonce = w3.eth.get_transaction_count(my_address)

    print("Building the transaction...")
    transaction = favorites_contract.constructor().build_transaction(
        {
            "chainId": chain_id,
            "from": my_address,
            "nonce": nonce,
            "gas": 3000000,  # Higher gas limit for RSK
            "gasPrice": w3.eth.gas_price * 2,  # Double the gas price to ensure transaction goes through
        }
    )

    print("Signing transaction...")
    signed_txn = w3.eth.account.sign_transaction(transaction, private_key=private_key)
    print("Deploying contract...")
    tx_hash = w3.eth.send_raw_transaction(signed_txn.rawTransaction)
    tx_receipt = w3.eth.wait_for_transaction_receipt(tx_hash)
    print(f"Contract deployed! Address: {tx_receipt.contractAddress}")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

> ## Key Points About RSK Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Notable Info when Deploying on Rootstock
```

1. **Chain ID**: RSK testnet uses chain ID 31
2. **Gas Settings**:

>    - We use a higher gas limit (3,000,000) for RSK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Use a higher gas limit (3,000,000) for Rootstock
```

   - We double the gas price to ensure the transaction goes through
3. **Transaction Type**:

>    - RSK works best with legacy transactions (using `gasPrice` instead of EIP-1559 parameters)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Rootstock is optimized for legacy transactions, utilizing `gasPrice` rather than EIP-1559 parameters.
```

## Running the Deployment

Execute the deployment script:

```bash

> python deploy_favorites_unsafe.py

Reviewer: @EdwinLiavaa  Error when running deployment script:

(venv) owanate@Owanates-MacBook-Pro Web3py-Vyper-RootStock % python3 deploy_favorites_unsafe.py
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/Users/owanate/Documents/Learning/Web3py-Vyper-RootStock/deploy_favorites_unsafe.py", line 1, in <module>
    from web3 import Web3
ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'web3'
(venv) owanate@Owanates-MacBook-Pro Web3py-Vyper-RootStock % 

Also specify troubleshooting options too, its usually a good idea to let the reader know how to solve possible errors they may encounter when running the commands.

E.g, If you get this error: ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'web3'
Do this:

Author: The error occurs because the web3 package is not installed in your virtual environment. To fix it, you should run pip install web3 or pip install -r requirements.txt while your virtual environment is activated to install all required dependencies.

---
sidebar_label: Vyper Smart Contract on Rootstock
sidebar_position: 7
title: Deploying a Vyper Smart Contract to Rootstock Testnet using Python
description: "This guide walks through the process of deploying a smart contract to the Rootstock testnet using Python and Web3.py. We'll be deploying a simple Vyper contract that demonstrates how to interact with the Rootstock network."

> tags: 

Reviewer: Kindly check that these tags are enclosed in []

  - rsk
  - rootstock
  - tutorials
  - resources
  - tests
  - web3py
  - vyper
  - smart contracts
  - python
  - developers
---

> This guide demonstrates how to deploy smart contracts written in Vyper to the Rootstock testnet using Python and Web3.py. Rootstock is a layer 2 solution that combines the security of Bitcoin's proof of work with Ethereum's smart contract capabilities. The platform is open-source, EVM-compatible, and secured by over 60% of Bitcoin’s hashing power, offering unique advantages for developers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rootstock is a layer 2 solution that combines the security of Bitcoin's proof of work with Ethereum's smart contract capabilities. The platform is open-source, EVM-compatible, and secured by over 60% of Bitcoin’s hashing power, offering unique advantages for developers.

This guide demonstrates how to deploy smart contracts written in Vyper to the Rootstock testnet using Python and Web3.py. 
```

Reviewer: Specify benefits of using the Vyper boilerplate or starter kit for developers
